Effluent purification by accelerated Protein
Biosynthesis using recombination of algae *

*

1
st Ashish Srinivas
6 sem ECE Department
NIE
Mysuru


Abstract—Bio filtration is a process by which industrial ef-
fluents are treated by means of bio organics.Spirulina is a

blue green alga (cyano-bacteria) encapsulated with Chlorella,
Botryococcus braunii, Microactinium sp peforms a process of

‘Protein Biosynthesis’, which converts all the hazardous ni-
trates, phosphates,zinc,cadmium, antimony and chromium into

desirable proteins and purifies water. Besides this it follows
circular economy approach by replenishing vital ecosystem whilst
preserving cost.

I. INTRODUCTION

A. Problem Statement
Effluents are nutrient enriched chemicals that are undesired
and discharged by industries.Impact of effluent on agricultural
soil, is mainly due to the presence of high nutrient contents
(Nitrogen and Phosphorus), high total dissolved solids and
other constituents such as heavy metals, which are added to
the soil over time. Wastewater can also contain salts that may
accumulate in the root zone with possible harmful impacts on
soil health and crop yields.
This secondary effluent is, however, loaded with inorganic
nitrogen and phosphorus and causes eutrophication and more
long-term problems because of refractory organics and heavy
metals that are discharged.
B. Principle

Protein biosynthesis (or protein synthesis) is a core bi-
ological process, occurring inside cells, balancing the loss

of cellular proteins (via degradation or export) through the
production of new proteins.
Wastewater environment is an ideal media for a wide range of
microorganisms specially bacteria, viruses and protozoa.

Bio-treatment with microalgae is particularly attractive be-
cause of their photosynthetic capabilities, converting solar

energy into useful bio masses and incorporating nutrients such
as nitrogen and phosphorus causing eutrophication (De la
Noue and De Pauw, 1988).  ̈
Identify applicable funding agency here. If none, delete this.

II. COMPOSITION OF TYPICAL WASTEWATER
The composition of wastewater is a reflection of the life
styles and technologies practiced in the producing society
(Gray, 1989). It is a complex mixture of natural organic
and inorganic materials as well as man-made compounds.
Three quarters of organic carbon in sewage are present as
carbohydrates, fats, proteins, amino acids, and volatile acids.
The inorganic constituents include large concentrations of
sodium, calcium, potassium, magnesium, chlorine, sulphur,
phosphate, bicarbonate, ammonium salts and heavy metals
III. CONVENTIONAL WASTE WATER TREATMENT

In wastewater treatment systems designed to remove nu-
trients, mainly dissolved nitrogen and phosphorus, is be-
coming an important step of treatment. Discharge of these

nutrients into sensitive water bodies leads to eutrophication
by stimulating the growth of unwanted plants such as algae
and aquatic macrophytes. Other consequences of nitrogen
compounds in wastewater effluents are toxicity of non-ionized
ammonia to fish and other aquatic organisms, interference
with disinfection where a free chlorine residual is required
and methemoglobinemia in influents due to excessive nitrate
concentrations (above 45 g/m3) in drinking water.
A. Purification by combination of algae
Micro algae are known to sequester heavy metals (Rai
et al., 1981). Discharge of toxic pollutants to waste water
collection systems has increased concurrently with society’s
progressive industrialization.
Significant concentrations of heavy metals and toxic organic
compounds have been measured in municipal wastewater.
Consequently, the ability of wastewater treatment systems to
tolerate and remove toxicity is of considerable importance.

Microalgae are efficient absorbers of heavy metals. Bioaccu-
mulation of metals by algae may create a feasible method for

remediating wastewater contaminated with metals.
This can be dependent on the alga, the metal ion species, the
solution conditions and whether the algal cells are living or
nonliving. In living algal cells trace nutrient metals (such as

Fig. 1. Rate of treatment

Co, Mo, Ca, Mg, Cu, Zn, Cr, Pb and Se) are accumulated
intracellularly by active biological transport
Field test shows that Micro Actinum sp absorbs 100% of lead
from 1.0 ppm solution with 20 h at 23°C and about 90% after
only 1.5 h at 30 °C.

IV. PROOF OF CONCEPT

Microalgal cultures offer an elegant solution to tertiary
and quaternary treatments due to the ability of microalgae
to use inorganic nitrogen and phosphorous for their growth
studied the ability of the combination of algae in nutrients
removal and reported a nutrient removal efficiency of 86% for
inorganic N and 78% for inorganic P. In earlier study, Colak
and Kaya (1988) reported an elimination of nitrogen (50.2
%) and phosphorus (85.7%) in industrial wastewater treatment
and elimination of phosphorus (97.8%) in domestic wastewater
treated by algae. The rate of bio absortion is implemented
using degradation rate equation:
dP
dt
= ksR(t) − kdP(t) (1)

Where:
P is predictive estimation
kd is co efficient of degradation
R is degradation rate
The following table indicates the rate degradation of
chemical oxygen demand of collective use of alage:

COD Results
Algae COD
before
COD
after
pH
Spirulina sp 350 175 7.3
Chlorellas 270 113.5 7.3
Botryococcus
b

312 182 7.5

Microactinium
sp

270 125 7.3

V. VERIFICATION BY PROTOTYPE
Based on created the model of an aerobic tank which I
created to simualate the conditions, it consists of industrial
effluents whose volume and temperature are monitored and
regulated by a microprocessor. Spirulina sp a blue green algae
(cyano-bacteria) present in the aerobic tank does all the magic
by ’Protein Biosynthesis’, which converts all the hazardous

Fig. 2. Protoype setup

Fig. 3. Rate Comparison

nitrates, phosphates(NO3, PO4) into desirable proteins and
thus purifies water.
A. Procedure
The prototype consists of an aerobic tank which constitutes
of industrial effluents whose volume, pH and temperature are
monitored and regulated by a microprocessor.
1.Once the primary tank has reached its capacity, spirulina is
added and the tank undergoes aeration to initiate the process
of protein biosynthesis.
2.After a stipulated time all the impurities are absorbed by the
algae by biosorption and settle at the bottom of the tank.
3.The clean water is then passed through a filter into the
secondary tank which ready for usage.

4. After treating the spirulina residue it is used as proteina-
ceous fertilizer to the soil.

B. Results
Algae can be used in wastewater treatment for a range of
purposes, including:
1.Reduction of BOD and COD
2.Removal of N and/or P,
3.Inhibition of coliforms,
4.Removal of heavy metals
This is verified by the data obtained with combination and
without combination of algae using control mechanisms in
figure 3.

CONCLUSION

Sustainable purification is a vision that has a variety of
capacities across the industry have been contributing to
notable benefits which are:
1.Conserving the environment and preventing pollution by
adopting sustainable practices, farmers will reduce their

reliance on nonrenewable energy, reduce chemical use and
save scarce resources.
2.Through this method we can purify using recombination of
complimentary algae.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The team thank the department of the plant cell biotech-
nology (PCBT), CSIR-CFTRI, Mysuru for providing spirulina

culture (CFR/SP6) culture and providing resources.

REFERENCES

[1] Abdel-Raouf, N., Ibraheem, I.B.M., Hammouda, O., 2003. Eutrophica-
tion of River Nile as indicator of pollution. In: Al-Azhar Bull. of Sci.,

Proceeding of 5th Int. Sci. Conf. 25–27 March 2003, pp. 293–306.
[2] P.D. Abel Water pollution biology, Ellis Horwood Series in Wastewater
Technology, Ellis Horwood Ltd., John Wiley and Sons, Chichester
(1989)
[3] Y. Liu, Q. Cao, F. Luo, J. Chen Biosorption of Cd2+, Cu2+, Ni2+ and
Zn2+ ions from aqueous solutions by pretreated biomass of brown algae
[4] S. Lim, W. Chu, S. Phang Use of Chlorella vulgaris for bioremediation
of textile wastewater J. Bioresour. Technol., 101 (2010), pp. 7314-7322
[5] E.P. Lincolin, J.F.K. Earle Wastewater treatment with microalgae I.
Akatsuka (Ed.), Introduction to Applied Phycology, SPB Academic
Publishing by The Hague, The Netherlands (1990), pp. 429-446
[6] N Abdel Raouf, Al Homaidan, I B M Ibraheem ,Micro algae and waste
water treatment,pp. 2-10

[7] M. Young, The Technical Writer’s Handbook. Mill Valley, CA: Univer-
sity Science, 1989.
